# Overview

\[REDACTED\] OS is a 64-bit, ARM (aarch64) operating system. It supports Raspberry Pis starting with the 3B and QEMU's virt machine.
It's an open source project, but mainly a personal project for my own use.
AI usage on this codebase, documentation, compiled executables or directly derived works is strictly forbidden.

## Quickstart

To compile, use the ARM-GNU-Toolchain, available from the ARM website. 
 * Run `make` to compile for QEMU's virt machine, `make raspi` to compile for Pi.
To run on a Raspberry Pi, format an SD card using the Raspberry Pi imager available on their website, then replace the kernel.img (Pi 3 and 4) and kernel_2712.img (Pi 5) files with the kernel generated by this project.
 * Run `make install` to compile for the Pi and install the kernel images onto a pre-formatted SD card. The "installer" has been tested only with one configuration and might not work for you, but you should be able to copy the files in manually.
To run on QEMU, having QEMU installed with aarch64 capabilities should be enough
 * Run `make run` to compile and install for QEMU.
 * `make run` relies on the `run_virt` shell script to run the system pre-configured with any peripherals you might need. Modify it as needed or run the command manually.
 * `run_virt` expects a disk image `disk.img` to be provided. Install `mtools`/`dosfstools` and run `createfs` to create it, based on a folder called `fs` in the root of the project. 
 * the `make [run]` command should handle all this configuration for you.
Running on a QEMU raspberry pi is similar to running on QEMU.
 * Run `make raspi`
 * The script with the command to run the VM is `run_raspi`
It's recommended to run `make clean` when switching between targets.

 ## Project Architecture

The system is built entirely from scratch with no third party code dependencies. The only dependency, the `redlib` library, called `shared` inside the system, is a submodule and its compilation is handled by the main Makefile.
The code for the kernel is found within `kernel`, but most driver code is inside `modules`. For drivers, `kernel` defines a header file with a common interface for the driver, `modules` implements it for each target. Each subfolder of `modules` is a driver, further divided into `virt`, `raspi` and/or `common` subfolders with the implementations. They're statically linked, as the SoC architecture of ARM machines does not (usually) allow for much hardware customization, so the hardware is not expected to change.
The `user` folder provides some pre-installed userland programs, including the system's app launcher. 
The `tools` folder provides some pre-installed terminal programs. Additionally, the system's default terminal (user/terminal) and its default shell (shared/shell/sheldon) expose some redlib/shared lib functions as commands. There's currently no way to see all available commands.

## System design

The system is not UNIX-like, but takes inspiration from UNIX and its planned successor Plan 9 in several aspects of its design, such as user interface and the filesystem.
The kernel is monolithic.
It's "opinionated", in the sense that it has a strong sense of default behavior, but should allow customizing as much as possible. Customizing might require patching the kernel for the time being.
Likewise, any part of the kernel's code that could be reused elsewhere (such as allocators, data structures and even window compositing) has probably been moved into redlib.
Redlib is meant to be (statically) linked against in order to invoke syscalls and other utilities. Any other library can be used instead, so long as it implements the syscalls the system provides (found in shared/syscalls)
The system has no dynamic lib support, all linking should be static.

## UI

The system has a window-based UI system, which is integrated into the kernel itself. 
Windows are drawable, so dragging and dropping on the desktop creates a window. 
Windows don't overlap, so windows will move themselves to the closest available space.
The desktop is infinite. Drag with middle mouse to move around it.
There's currently no window controls (close, minimize, maximize) or visible dock.
By default a new window opens on an application launcher. It takes applications from `/home/applications` (which is a shared folder, explained in the filesystem section) and `/boot/redos/system` (which maps to `/fs/redos/system`)

### For Developers

The `draw_ctx` type (`shared/graphic_types.h`) is used to hold window/framebuffer information. 
Call `request_draw_ctx(draw_ctx*)`, providing an empty `draw_ctx` object for the system to provide your application with a framebuffer (`draw_ctx.fb`), as well as width/height/stride information `draw_ctx.width/height/stride`.
* Pre-filling the `width` and `height` of the `draw_ctx` before calling `request_draw_ctx` will resize the window to the provided size.
* If an application is opened from the terminal, its default behavior is to use no graphics, receive no input and print its console output to the terminal's screen. Calling `request_draw_ctx` will overwrite this behavior and make the program completely standalone, receiving input and drawing to the screen directly.
Inform the system to refresh the window with `commit_draw_ctx(draw_ctx*)`. Inside the draw_ctx, inform the system of which ranges to re-render (`draw_ctx.dirty_rects/dirty_count`) or ask it to re-render the entire window (`draw_ctx.full_redraw`).
If needed, the window can be resized with `resize_window_ctx(draw_ctx*)`. The window will resize and move to an empty area to not overlap with any windows if needed, and the draw_ctx will be updated with the new size and a new framebuffer.
All colors are 32-bit, as indicated by the `color` and `argbcolor` redlib types (`shared/graphic_types.h`). The colors are stored internally as BBGGRRAA, but due to endianness, they can be written as 0xAARRGGBB in hexadecimal. `argbcolor` is a union divided by channel.

## Terminal

The system's terminal has the same basic functionality as any other in terms of text input, history, etc, but differs greatly in its implementation.
Its default shell (`sheldon`) provides some commands such as `echo` or `ls` as built-in, which simply wrap around `redlib` functions. These built-ins do not run in separate processes. Anything not registered as builtin will be run from `/tools` inside the system, which maps to `/fs/redos/tools` inside the project's root. 

### For developers

When the terminal launches a non-built-in program from `/tools`, it launches as its own process. The terminal will keep track of its `proc_id` and poll `/proc/<id>/out` and `/proc/<id>/state` to print its output to the screen and check when the program has exited. 
`/proc/<id>/out` is automatically written to by `redlib`'s `print` and `put` functions (they work like libc's `printf` but print adds a newline at the end, whereas put does not).
Each process' output is automatically assigned file descriptor 2 (see file descriptors in the filesystem section).

Prints can be formatted with a simple markup language. While under development, the language allows for setting a text color, background color, moving the cursor and wiping the screen. Some examples:
* `{color:ff0000 this will be red} this will not`.
* `{wipe}`
* `{move:10,10} Cursor begins at 10,10`
`{` begins an instruction, `}` ends it, `:` separates an instruction from an argument, `,` separates arguments, ` ` separates the command from the contents.
Nesting these instructions will be supported in the future but will lose any formatting as soon as the innermost format instruction ends 

The system also has WIP support for rendering structured data (such as tables and single entries). It relies on redlib's binary serializer `data/serialize/binary_serial` and on several special files inside `/environment`, a helper file `environment/env_types.h` is provided. 
1. Inform the terminal of your program's display requirements with `set_environment_config((env_config){<env_display_type>,<env_behavior>});` or write the struct directly to `/environment/config`. Only the document (single entry) display type is currently supported. Behavior currently only informs the terminal if it should wipe the screen or scroll when the data is updated.
2. Inform the system of the new config by sending `\[` through regular process output (`print` or `put`)
3. Define the data structure with a structdef array, such as: `{{ .type = binary_type_i32,      .name = string_from_literal("number") }, ... }`. Inform the system by sending `\1` through regular output.
5. Serialize the format with `set_environment_structure` (in the helper, or send it to `/environment/structure` after calling the serializer's `bin_ser_emit_structure` on it) passing the array and number of entries.
6. Create a binary serializer using the data structure you defined `make_binary_serializer` and serialize data with `bin_ser_serialize`, passing the serializer, data, data_size and count. Note that only packed structs are supported for the time being.
7. Send the serialized data with `send_environment_data` or writing it to `/environment/data`. Inform the system with `\3`.

The terminal can also send input, currently limited to ASCII commands to the currently running process. `CTRL+C` will send a `QUIT` signal (the process could choose ignore it), `CTRL+Z` to send a `STOP` signal and halt execution, and `CTRL+V` to resume with a `CONT` signal.

As mentioned in the UI section, terminal support only works until a process requests a draw context, at which point the terminal will fully disconnect from it.

## Filesystem

The filesystem root is `/`
The filesystem is made up of several `system_module`, each of which gets mounted to a specific mount point and are available at `/mountpoint`.
Each module defines its own functions for reading/writing/opening/truncating files, getting status of files and folders, and listing directories.
Status of files and folders (`stat`) informs of the type (file or folder) and size. For folders, the size is reported as 0.
The filesystem may define aliases within itself. They're completely opaque to the user or programmer, but cannot be edited programmatically.

### Special filesystem modules

Some modules in the system are set up to power special behavior, as the system's "Everything is a file" philosophy implies. 
They rely heavily on virtual files: Files that are not on disk and instead exist only to map system resources onto the filesystem.
Instead of documenting the individual modules, here's a simple list of how these special file system modules work.
* Their base, vfs (`/shared/files/vfs.h`) allows for defining virtual files and folders when the module is first loaded. Including the possibility of backing them up with a buffer. It allows interpreting paths as variables through a basic router. For instance, the `/proc/<id>/state` and `/proc/<id>/out` mentioned in the terminal can be defined in this router with `:id/state`, `:id/out`, and the system should resolve a path such as `/proc/3/out` as matching the second pattern. Ironically, `/proc` was made before this system was ready and has not been ported yet, but it's the easiest way to explain it. 
* Some modules can be history-based, such as `/clipboard`. Writing or reading to/from `/clipboard` is equivalent to a copy/paste, but each time you do it , the module creates a new file so it can keep a history. The file is assigned an ascending id, but accessing `/clipboard/latest/:id` inverts the ids, with 0 being the newest. This is implemented with the stackfs (`/shared/files/stackfs.h`). Note that in this case `/clipboard` acts as both a folder and a file, as detailed below.
* Similar to the stackfs, the system has folderfs (`/shared/files/folderfs.h`). It has the same id-based nature, but each id maps to a folder with a common internal structure rather than a file. It uses sequential ids, but includes a way to translate them to any other value, thus allowing them to be mapped to different ids (such as process id).

### Folders as files

As mentioned for the stack-based filesystem (such as the clipboard), sometimes a path may be accessed as either a folder or a file, based on use case. 
As a general rule, accessing the `/path` itself implies accessing it as a file, accessing it as `/path/with/subfolder` accesses it as a folder. From the programmer's point of view, the distinction is clear, as the behavior for accessing a file (readf, writef, openf) and a folder (dir_list) is different.
For further transparency, a path that can be accessed as both usually includes a file called `#` within itself, pointing to the file version of itself.
To sum up:
* `readf on /clipboard`: paste
* `dir_list on /clipboard`: see clipboard history, will include a file called `#`
* `readf on /clipboard/#`: paste, same as `readf on /clipboard`

### Buffers

To aid with filesystem operations, but also any kind of memory buffer operations, the buffer type is provided (`/shared/files/buffer.h`). 
It's designed for files, but since files often represent data, it easily maps to any kind of data as well. 
It can be created with `buffer_create` passing a reference to an empty `buffer` in memory you control. Options can be passed to it:
* buffer_can_grow: if the limit size provided is exceeded while writing, it will be relocated to a larger chunk of memory, allowing for easy growth.
* buffer_circular: if the limit size provided is reached or exceeded, the write will begin again from the beginning of the buffer, overwriting old data
* buffer_static: the buffer will always be written and read from at the beginning of the buffer, ignoring the cursor value provided. This is useful when the buffer maps over a type rather than a regular file.

### Data signatures

One shortcoming the UNIX/Plan9 Everything-is-a-file philosophy has is that, while it allows to provide binary streams of data as files, they appear as incomprehensible binary data to anyone not already aware of their contents. This can become especially difficult to deal with if we're working with something like `/clipboard`, where anything from text, to image formats, to file paths to raw pixels can be copied. 
Data signatures fix this with a voluntary, non-verified data signature. An 8-byte value indicating the type of data represented by a buffer or file. The filesystem and buffers allow for tagging with this system, and a helper is provided in `/shared/files/data_signatures.h` with some common signatures and a macro to make new ones.
Its value can be anything as long as it's at most 8 bytes, including any kind of magic number an application chooses to use to filter its data.
Values are not reserved, registered or otherwise validated. Anyone can create a file with any signature, or a file with no signature.

In the future, data signatures could be combined with the binary serialization system (and a bit more vetting) to make certain files easily readable and to expand the terminal's structured data output capabilities.

### Userland virtual system

The system provides two distinct filesystems. They can be called `namespaces`, similar to what Plan9 calls them, but the name may not stick, and the functionality isn't exactly the same.
The kernel has a "canonical" vision of the filesystem. Any kernel-level modules are attached to the so-called kernelfs. 
Userland applications have their own, per-process filesystem. Currently, that filesystem includes modules that are aliased onto kernelfs modules. For example, `/environment` in a userland application points to `/environments/:id` (note the plural in the kernelfs version). 
`/resources` points to a folder called `resources` located inside the current process' app bundle, should it have one (more on bundles later).

The idea for the system is to have userland applications only be able to access their own filesystem, and any resources be made available either instanced (like `environment` or `resources`) aliased (such as `/applications` pointing to `/home/applications`) or mirrored (directly pointing to the kernelfs module).
Due to the fact that several applications, including the system's own filebrowser and app launcher, currently rely on the kernelfs, and there isn't an elegant solution to providing access without constantly prompting the user for permission, userland apps have access to kernelfs as well. This can be revoked changing the `#define ISOLATEDFS_ALLOW_KFS true` to `false` but will probably break everything.

### For developers

To interact with a file, open it by calling `openf` with its path and providing an empty `file` struct (`/shared/files/fs.h`). The struct will be filled in with the file's size, an instance id (unique per each instance of an open file), and possibly a data signature. A cursor is also provided and updated by read/write, and can be modified manually or by using the `seekf` function.

Reading a file requires you to provide a pre-allocated buffer to be filled with the data. Call `readf` with the `file` instance, a buffer and its size. 
Writing a file is similar to reading in the way it works, using `writef`. It would be redundant to explain why a buffer is required here as well.
If needed, truncating a file using `truncatef` will shrink it to the specified size.
To list the contents of a directory, use `dir_list`, providing the path and a buffer to report the names of the entries inside the folder, as well as an offset for where to begin listing. The buffer will be filled with a 32-bit `count` and a sequence of null-terminated strings. If the buffer is not big enough, the filesystem will fill in the offset (which you pass as a pointer), allowing you to call the function again with more memory and continue where you left off. 
Offsets are not always sequential numbers, their value is determined by the filesystem module. It's better to let the system handle offsets without modifying them directly.
There's currently no support for creating files or folders programmatically.

Helpers for several common filesystem operations are provided in `shared/files/helpers.h`

## Packaging

Executables in the system use the .elf format, with compilation similar to how it's done for the OS itself (there's an alternate build method in `shared/redbuild.h`, but it's not relevant for the os itself).
For command line tools, just the .elf file is enough.
For ui applications, a .elf might suffice as well, but the system provides a packaging system with the extension `.red`. 
`.red` are just folders, containing an executable with the same name as the package, replacing the extension with `.elf`
They can internally contain a `resources` folder, which can then be access as `/resources` easily as explained in the userland virtual filesystem section.
Due to the way the makefile for userland builtin applications works, it also creates a `.bin` version alongside the `.elf`, but the system is not prepared to run them. This might be added soon.
Both the makefile in the `user` folder and the redbuild build system have ways to auto-package projects into the `.red`, including the resources folder.

For the redbuild build system, a c file needs to be compiled for it. It then has the ability to rebuild itself (`rebuild_self`). It should be possible to find some examples on how it works on some of my other repos, but most of the times I write the build script in my programming language called `cred`, which transpiles to C before compiling. The entire thing (language + build system) is a work in progress.

## Home/Shared folder

On QEMU, on mac and linux host systems, it's possible to activate a feature called the shared filesystem. This is a folder in the shared system that's made available to the host system. 
Right now, this folder is `/home`. In userland programs, `/shared` is also mapped to `/home`, since shared is the old name for the folder. Naming is subject to change.
The `run_virt` script allows to specify a folder to be shared with the system to be made into the home folder. If none is provided or the folder doesn't exist, the feature is disabled. 

The home folder currently does not work on Windows or bare metal builds, since it's managed by a host operating system through QEMU on supported hosts only. Its structure/name will probably need to change to fix this issue, but it works for development for now.

It has no intended structure, since it's created and mostly managed externally, but the app launcher will look into `/home/applications` for any `.red` packages to run. Since the folder is managed by the host system, you can compile applications, put them in this folder (automatically if possible) and the system will find your application without needing to restart. It's particularly helpful for app development.

## Theme

The system has a way of customizing look and feel, as well as some behavior, such as the initial animation that plays on boot, or even the name of the OS on screen and the text that appears on a panic screen, which is unfortunately too common.

Place a file named `theme.config` inside `fs/redos` in the project directory to have it picked up as the theme.
The file is a simplified TOML format (mostly in the sense that it doesn't do \[these\]), and supports strings, ints and booleans as 0/1 values. 
More documentation or a template will be provided soon, as well as a way to edit the theme within the system itself, since UI customization should not be done through text files, but for the time being, look into `/kernel/theme/theme.h and .c` for possible values.

It's possible to have multiple theme files and switch between them by placing multiple `.config` files inside `fs/redos`, and then placing a file called `theme` inside `/home` (see home/shared folder), and using the built in theme picker to switch between them. This needlessly complicated system was built at a time when the partition made from the `fs` folder was not editable, but now that it is, it'll be reworked.

It's possible to place a `desktop.png` image inside `fs/redos` to be loaded as a background image to the desktop, and the system's background color will adapt to an average of the colors of that image.

It's also possible to place a `startup.wav` sound to play if the `theme.config` `play_startup_sound=1` option is enabled. WAV support is very limited, mainly in needing to be a 2-channel int16 format wav file. If the file fails to load or one is not provided, a chime will play if the option is enabled.

### For developers

You can match your application to the system theme by reading `/theme`. Even though it has a data signature (meant to make it easier to read binary files), its structure is ironically not documented anywhere, but it maps to `/kernel/theme/theme.h`'s `system_theme_t` type.
Its first value is the background color, second is foreground color. 

## Networking

[WIP]

## Signals

[WIP]
